Session recording docs (#2214)
pomerium/documentation: content/docs/capabilities/session-recording.mdx

---
title: SSH Session Recording
description: Learn how to set up SSH session recording.
lang: en-US
sidebar_label: 'Session Recording'
keywords: [pomerium, ssh, recording, session recording, audit]
sidebar_class_name: enterprise
---

import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';

:::enterprise

This article describes a use case available to [Pomerium Enterprise](/docs/deploy/enterprise/install) customers.

:::

## Overview

> Pomerium supports recording, storage, and playback (via Enterprise Console) of interactive SSH sessions for auditing and compliance needs. To enable session recording in Pomerium, you will be required to set up the session recording extension, a cloud or self-hosted blob storage provider, make the relevant policy changes to routes and connect the Pomerium instance to the Enterprise Console.

Reviewer: Add a link to https://github.com/pomerium/documentation/pull/2226

Set the blob storage from a list of available datasources configured for this namespace:

![](./img/session-recording/set-blob-storage.png)

When users access an SSH route with `session_recording.enabled=true`, the recording will show up in the Recordings tab, where it is available for playback:

![](./img/session-recording/session-recordings-showup.png)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="Terraform" label="Terraform">

Setting up recording datasources for viewing in the Enterprise Console:

```hcl
resource "pomerium_recording_data_source" "gcs_dev" {
  name       = "gcs_dev"
  namespace  = # target namespace id
  bucket_uri = "gs://alex-test-bucket-session-recording"
}
```

Remember to pass this bucket to the Core instance associated with this namespace:

```hcl
resource "pomerium_settings" "test_session_recording_opts" {
  namespace_id    = pomerium_cluster.test.namespace_id
  blob_storage    = {
    bucket_uri : pomerium_recording_data_source.gcs_dev.bucket_uri
  }
  # File paths to extensions to be loaded by envoy at runtime.
  envoy_dynamic_extensions = # make sure this is configured as well!
}

```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

### 4. Connect Pomerium instance to Enterprise

> Connect the instance on which you want to record sessions to Enterprise. To do so, you will need the `databroker service URL` & `shared secret` of that instance and, optionally, the certificates required to connect to it.

Reviewer 2: style nit: the code formatting on "databroker service URL" and "shared secret" looks odd to me. Should these be links to the corresponding setting reference pages instead?

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="Enterprise" value="Enterprise">

> Navigate to `Configure>Clusters` side panel tab, and click "Add Cluster":

Reviewer 2: The code style on "Configure>Clusters" also looks odd to me.

Maybe something like this instead? (Not sure if we have standard terminology for this.)

```suggestion
Navigate to the "Clusters" page using the side panel link (under the "Configure" heading), and click "Add Cluster":
```

  from         = "ssh://terraform"
  to           = ["ssh://0.0.0.0:22"]
  policies     = # your policy here

  # Enable session recording for this route.
  session_recording = {
    enabled = true
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Storage Configuration

:::danger important

Since session recording can contain privileged information about remote environments, it is recommended to enable strict storage security, encryption & integrity parameters.

End users may wish to consult information related to object locking and retention for their cloud provider:

- [AWS S3](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
- [GCS Storage](https://docs.cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
- [Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-storage-overview)

For specific privileged access management compliance standards, end-users will want to consult further documentation for each cloud provider's blob store.

:::

:::important

Both the instance uploading the recordings and the Enterprise instance need to be configured with credentials with valid access to the bucket(s) being configured. See below for each storage type.

:::

:::important

> Pomerium writes recordings using WORM (Write Once Read Many) semantics, which means it is compatible with each blob storage integration's strictest data compliance & governance standards.

Reviewer: Can we add a link to the docs in #2226

More details can be found in the [Auditing](#auditing) section.

:::

Blob storage configurations follow a URI format:

```
<scheme>://<bucket>?<param1>=<value1>&<param2>=<value2>
```

> See cloud-provider-specific details below. You can configure them via Enterprise UI or Terraform.

Reviewer 2: punctuation nit: en dash for hyphenating a compound phrase ([reference](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/em-dash-en-dash-how-to-use#:~:text=If%20you%20want,Websterburg%20Bakery%20era))

```suggestion
See cloud provider–specific details below. You can configure them via Enterprise UI or Terraform.
```

Alternatively, might be more readable to rephrase this like "See details for specific cloud providers below." or so.

```hcl
resource "pomerium_recording_data_source" "gcs_dev" {
  name       = "gcs_dev"
  namespace  = # namespace id
  bucket_uri = "gs://alex-test-bucket-session-recording"
}

// this needs to be set on the cluster settings as well!
// This allows the instance uploading the recordings to use this datasource

resource "pomerium_settings" "test_session_recording_opts" {
  namespace_id    = pomerium_cluster.test.namespace_id
  // other settings ...

  // Pass in the bucket configured above
  blob_storage = {
    bucket_uri: pomerium_recording_data_source.gcs_dev.bucket_uri
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### GCS

**Credential setup**:

By default, the instances connected with this bucket URI will use [Application Default Credentials for Google Cloud](https://docs.cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/application-default/login). For alternative credential configuration for Google Cloud, see [Application Default Credentials](https://docs.cloud.google.com/docs/authentication#service-accounts).

A convenient way to pass in credentials is through the environment variable:

```bash
GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=</path/to/credentials-file>
```

> At minimum, the instance uploading the recordings will require `Storage Object User` permissions and the Enterprise instance will require the `Storage Object Viewer` permissions.

Reviewer: I believe the default will give `storage.objects.delete` which would violate `WORM`

Reviewer: `roles/storage.objectCreator`

Reviewer 3: the preset `storage.objectCreator` is insufficient because it does not include reads, which can be done occasionally if there is temporary failure in the upload pipeline where we restart from a checkpoint. I think you can configure more granular permissions manually instead of using the presets in the gcp console

Reviewer 3: clarified the permissions for gcs

```
s3://mybucket?endpoint=http://my.minio.local:8080&disable_https=true&s3ForcePathStyle=true
```

Regions must still be set for credential configuration on self-hosted solutions. Using a placeholder like `us-east-1` is the recommended default.

:::

### Azure

**Credential Setup**:

Azure container storage keys can be loaded from:

```bash
AZURE_STORAGE_KEY=<base64-key>
AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT=<storage-account>
```

Or via a SAS token:

```bash
export AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT=<storage-account>
export AZURE_STORAGE_SAS_TOKEN="sv=...&sig=..."
```

Or via a full connection string:

```bash
export AZURE_STORAGE_CONNECTION_STRING="<full-connection-string>"
export AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT=<storage account> # if not specified in the connection string
```

For more granular control:

```bash
export AZURE_CLIENT_ID=...
export AZURE_TENANT_ID=...
export AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET=...               # client secret, OR:
export AZURE_CLIENT_CERTIFICATE_PATH=/path/to/cert.pem
```

Please consult the [upstream documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/) for additional details.

**Bucket URI**:

- Scheme : `azblob`

> - Path : `<container-name>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Scheme: `azblob`
- Path: `<container-name>`
```

| Parameter | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `domain` | Sets custom domain name for the storage. |
| `protocol` | Protocol can be provided to specify protocol to access Azure Blob Storage. Protocols that can be specified are "http" for local emulator and "https" for general. Defaults to "https". |
| `cdn` | IsCDN can be set to true when using a CDN URL pointing to a [blob storage account](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cdn/cdn-create-a-storage-account-with-cdn) |
| `localemu` | IsLocalEmulator should be set to true when targeting Local Storage Emulator (Azurite). |

### File

:::danger important

File storage is not recommended for production setups. Additionally, for Enterprise to replay recordings, it must be on the same host as the instances writing to file storage.

:::

**Bucket URI**

```
file://<file-path>
```

- Scheme : `file`

> - Path : filesystem path to write recordings to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Scheme: `file`
- Path: filesystem path to write recordings to
```

                ├── metadata.proto
                ├── recording_0000000000
                ├── recording_0000000001
                ├── ...
                ├── recording_XXXXXXXXXX
                ├── signature
```

- `pomerium-cluster-id` is the cluster ID associated with a Pomerium cluster when it is connected to Enterprise.
- `recording-id` is a unique identifier for a recording.
- `metadata.<ext>` contains metadata about the session.
- `recording_*` contains the actual contents. Recordings are split into chunks. Chunk IDs are monotonically increasing. Stored in protobuf format.
- `signature` contains metadata about the provenance of the artifact. Currently holds the full Pomerium version.

</details>

#### Metadata

Pomerium captures the following metadata for each recording:

- `start_time` : when the session started
- `login_name` : the ssh user
- `session_id` : pomerium session id
- `user_id` : pomerium user id
- `stream_id` : internal stream id for correlation with logs
- `route_name` : pomerium route name, e.g. `from: ssh://example`, the route_name would be `example`
- `upstream` : upstream target, e.g. `to: ssh://0.0.0.0:22`, the upstream would be `0.0.0.0:22`

> - `pty_info` : info about the shell where the recording came from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `start_time`: when the session started
- `login_name`: the ssh user
- `session_id`: pomerium session id
- `user_id`: pomerium user id
- `stream_id`: internal stream id for correlation with logs
- `route_name`: pomerium route name, e.g. `from: ssh://example`, the route_name would be `example`
- `upstream`: upstream target, e.g. `to: ssh://0.0.0.0:22`, the upstream would be `0.0.0.0:22`
- `pty_info`: info about the shell where the recording came from
```

:::warning

By default queries are run by making requests to the blob storage provider. This may become slow without caching. Please consult [Performance Tuning (Access)](#performance-tuning-access) for more information on how to speed up these queries.

:::

For end-users looking for detailed analytical querying it is recommended to ingest the `metadata.json` for each recording into a purpose-built querying & analytics tool. It is then possible to replay this recording knowing its cluster-id, the namespace it was configured in, and its recording id. See [Storage Configuration](#storage-configuration) for more details on the storage layer path structure & metadata contents.

## Auditing

The Integrity & Auditing section describes the "chain of custody" for session recording data, enabling end-users to meet strict compliance requirements for the handling and auditing of privileged information.

The "chain of custody" model Pomerium provides relies on:

- **Storage access patterns** : guarantees about how the recordings are uploaded and accessed
- **Enterprise audit logs** : records every access by end-users through Pomerium Enterprise

> - **Cloud provider audit logs** : Audit logs at the storage layer include metadata that can be correlated with Pomerium Enterprise, enabling verification when data was accessed through Pomerium Enterprise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Storage access patterns**: guarantees about how the recordings are uploaded and accessed
- **Enterprise audit logs**: records every access by end-users through Pomerium Enterprise
- **Cloud provider audit logs**: Audit logs at the storage layer include metadata that can be correlated with Pomerium Enterprise, enabling verification when data was accessed through Pomerium Enterprise.
```

In Enterprise, each time a bucket or specific recording data is accessed, Enterprise will emit audit logs. For example:

```json
{"level":"info","access_id":"777b6b59-a7e6-4310-af76-448da383f47d","access_type":"recording","deny":false,"success":true,"reason":"","recording_format":"ssh","object_key":"default/ssh/v1/3ff8e81f44b6eaecadaaaa7d541c8c51/*","source_ip":"<redacted>",user_agent":"Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Ubuntu; Linux x86_64; rv:150.0) Gecko/20100101 Firefox/150.0","user_role":"admin","user_email":"alamarre@pomerium.com","user_id":"<redacted>","user_hmac_id":"aw3iU61Z7p6wxCnNq/JVDgGHpJzhwT3eqs5Wmz8BPD8=","user_session_start":1779724385,"user_session_exp":1779724685,"datasource":"9d8dbd2c-8cce-4e66-9c1f-c490b4a07243/gcs-dev","time":"2026-05-25T11:53:05-04:00","message":"authorize blob read"}
```

Some of the fields above were redacted for the docs, but will contain the relevant information related to access.

| Field | Description | Sensitivity |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `access_id` | Unique identifier for a particular action. Note that an action here can have multiple access events - opening the bucket, reading metadata, and viewing the recording | Low |

> | `access_type` | The type of access. `recording` : the recording contents were viewed. `metadata` : the recording metadata was viewed. `bucket`(internal) : Pomerium Enterprise made a connection to the bucket for reading. `download` : the recording was downloaded | Low |

Reviewer 2: Could we format the possible values in a list?

```suggestion
| `access_type` | The type of access. <ul><li>`recording`: the recording contents were viewed</li><li>`metadata`: the recording metadata was viewed</li><li>`bucket`: (internal) Pomerium Enterprise made a connection to the bucket for reading</li><li>`download`: the recording was downloaded</li></ul> | Low |
```

| `object_key` | Object storage key (or key prefix) of the recording data being accessed. Contains the Pomerium `cluster ID`. `cluster ID` is assigned when connecting Pomerium instances to Enterprise via the cluster syncer | Moderate |
| `source_ip` | IP address the request originated from. | High |
| `user_agent` | User agent header of the client that made the request. Contains remote host information. | Moderate |
| `user_role` | Pomerium Enterprise role of the user performing the access. | Moderate |
| `user_email` | Email address of the user performing the access. | Moderate |
| `user_id` | IDP user id of the user performing the access. | High |
| `user_hmac_id` | HMAC of the user id, suitable for correlation with the blob storage audit logs | Low |
| `user_session_start` | Unix timestamp of when the user's session started. | Low |
| `user_session_exp` | Unix timestamp of when the user's session expires. | Low |
| `datasource` | Identifier of the configured blob datasource being read (`<namespace-id>/<datasource-name>`). `<namespace-id>` is the ID of the namespace in Pomerium Enterprise where this datasource was configured | Moderate |

:::important

> The HMAC of the user id is generated from the shared_secret Pomerium Enterprise uses. Make sure when rotating shared_secrets to keep track of previous secrets for correlation on older logs.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, the style of shared_secret here also looks odd to me. 

Maybe something like this?
```suggestion
The HMAC of the user id is generated from the [**shared secret**](/docs/reference/shared-secret) Pomerium Enterprise uses. When rotating the shared secret, keep track of the previous secret in order to correlate against older audit logs.
```

Extension file paths can be configured in the Pomerium config.yaml as follows:

| **Config file key**        | **Type**           |
| :------------------------- | :----------------- |
| `envoy_dynamic_extensions` | `array of strings` |

```yaml title="config.yaml"
envoy_dynamic_extensions:
  - /extensions/session_recording/session_recording_extension.so
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Terraform" label="Terraform">

```hcl
resource "pomerium_settings" "test_session_recording_opts" {
  namespace_id    = # target namespace

  # File paths to extensions to be loaded by envoy at runtime.
  envoy_dynamic_extensions = [
    "/usr/local/config/pomerium/extensions/session_recording_extension.so"
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### 3. Setup storage layer

Session recordings are stored in Blob (Binary Large Object) stores.

Pomerium uploads the following information to the storage layer:

- recording of the SSH session.
- metadata associated with the session, such as user information & Pomerium route information.
- metadata associated with the provenance of the recording, such as the version of Pomerium used to produce the recording.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="Core" label="Core">

:::important

> Uploading to blob stores requires a cluster ID, which is assigned by Pomerium Enterprise. A Pomerium Core instance must therefore be connected to Pomerium Enterprise at least once before it can upload recordings.

Reviewer 4: Silly question, but doesn't enterprise always need to a pomerium core instance?

Reviewer 3: You can't record in any Pomerium without it being connected to Enterprise, which is different than the default cluster used to bootstrap Enterprise

Configuring the bucket in Core alone is not sufficient — recordings will not appear in the Enterprise Console unless the same bucket is also configured in Enterprise.

> For this reason, we strongly recommend configuring storage through Pomerium Enterprise or the Terraform provider.

Reviewer 4: Consider bolding `we strongly recommend configuring storage through Pomerium Enterprise or the Terraform provider.`

![](./img/session-recording/navigate-to-settings.png)

Set the blob storage from a list of available datasources configured for this namespace:

![](./img/session-recording/set-blob-storage.png)

When users access an SSH route with `session_recording.enabled=true`, the recording will show up in the Recordings tab, where it is available for playback:

![](./img/session-recording/session-recordings-showup.png)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="Terraform" label="Terraform">

Setting up recording datasources for viewing in the Enterprise Console:

```hcl
resource "pomerium_recording_data_source" "gcs_dev" {
  name       = "gcs_dev"
  namespace  = # target namespace id
  bucket_uri = "gs://alex-test-bucket-session-recording"
}
```

Remember to pass this bucket to the Core instance associated with this namespace:

```hcl
resource "pomerium_settings" "test_session_recording_opts" {
  namespace_id    = pomerium_cluster.test.namespace_id
  blob_storage    = {
    bucket_uri : pomerium_recording_data_source.gcs_dev.bucket_uri
  }
  # File paths to extensions to be loaded by envoy at runtime.
  envoy_dynamic_extensions = # make sure this is configured as well!
}

```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

> The HMAC of the user id is generated from the [**shared secret**](/docs/reference/shared-secret) Pomerium Enterprise uses. When rotating the shared secret, keep track of the previous secret in order to correlate against older audit logs.

Reviewer 4: Consider also bolding `When rotating the shared secret, keep track of the previous secret in order to correlate against older audit logs.`

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Terraform" label="Terraform">

```hcl
resource "pomerium_route" "ssh_recorded" {
  name         = "ssh_recorded"
  namespace_id = # your namespace ID here
  from         = "ssh://terraform"
  to           = ["ssh://0.0.0.0:22"]
  policies     = # your policy here

  # Enable session recording for this route.
  session_recording = {
    enabled = true
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Storage Configuration

:::danger important

Since session recording can contain privileged information about remote environments, it is recommended to enable strict storage security, encryption & integrity parameters.

End users may wish to consult information related to object locking and retention for their cloud provider:

- [AWS S3](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
- [GCS Storage](https://docs.cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
- [Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-storage-overview)

For specific privileged access management compliance standards, end-users will want to consult further documentation for each cloud provider's blob store.

:::

:::important

> Both the instance uploading the recordings and the Enterprise instance need to be configured with credentials with valid access to the bucket(s) being configured. See below for each storage type.

Reviewer 4: Consider making this clearer, e.g. "The Pomerium Core proxy (which uploads recordings) needs write access to the bucket, and the Enterprise Console (which serves them for playback) needs read access. Both must be configured with credentials for the same bucket. See below for each storage type."

Reviewer 3: The point I tried to make here (and probably failed) is that credentials have to be explicitly passed to both instances, since that could be a footgun. I'll try to make this clearer

                ├── ...
                ├── recording_XXXXXXXXXX
                ├── signature
```

- `pomerium-cluster-id` is the cluster ID associated with a Pomerium cluster when it is connected to Enterprise.
- `recording-id` is a unique identifier for a recording.
- `metadata.<ext>` contains metadata about the session.
- `recording_*` contains the actual contents. Recordings are split into chunks. Chunk IDs are monotonically increasing. Stored in protobuf format.
- `signature` contains metadata about the provenance of the artifact. Currently holds the full Pomerium version.

</details>

#### Metadata

Pomerium captures the following metadata for each recording:

- `start_time`: when the session started
- `login_name`: the ssh user
- `session_id`: pomerium session id
- `user_id`: pomerium user id
- `stream_id`: internal stream id for correlation with logs
- `route_name`: pomerium route name, e.g. `from: ssh://example`, the route_name would be `example`
- `upstream`: upstream target, e.g. `to: ssh://0.0.0.0:22`, the upstream would be `0.0.0.0:22`
- `pty_info`: info about the shell where the recording came from

## Accessing recordings

### Playback

> Session recordings can be replayed in Pomerium Enterprise. Navigate to the "Records" page using the side panel link (under the "Recordings" heading) to view available recordings. They are available by Pomerium Enterprise Namespace and Cluster, and can only be accessed by the appropriate namespace administrator.

Reviewer 4: Mentioning the "Records" page confused me as I was looking at the screenshot.

```suggestion
Session recordings can be replayed in Pomerium Enterprise. Click **Recordings** in the sidebar (under the **Recordings** section) to view available recordings. They are available by Pomerium Enterprise Namespace and Cluster, and can only be accessed by the appropriate namespace administrator.
```
